---
title: A Peek at Christianity
date: 2024-06-23
slug: peek-at-christianity
caption: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@zacong?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Zac Ong</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/man-standing-near-white-wall-4THZE0vZVqs?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>

draft: true

image: new-city.jpg
images:
    - images/new-city.jpg
---

Early in my sophomore year of college, I became interested in the topic of religion. I grew up sparsely going to a Christian church when I was really young, never really embracing any of the teachings or even dabbling with the concept of God. It was just as if church was just a small side quest that I dropped before I even became conscious of my existence. I would touch on the topic of relgion again over the years, reading about different religious histories, conflicts, and events throughout history. Every society that's ever existed has embraced some sort of religion. Clearly, there was some human nature that forced us to cling onto religion in order to live and build societies. However, this statement no rings as true. 

We've gotten to a unique point in history where religion has begun to decline. More and more people are beginning to identify as atheist or agnostic, with many children only loosely clinging onto the beliefs of their parents. Sure reasons for this decline include scientific and technological advancements, social media, the sexual revolution, and the secularization of government. Due to the US's historical Christian and religious roots, there is still a pretty strong ongoing battle between traditional and progressive ideals. Older generations are trying to get their children to internalize religious ideals while new generations claim that religion is a collection of outdated sexist and homophobic ideals. Clearly, there's a polarization of what should be a balance between traditional wisdom and new progressive ideas, but that's a piece for another day. Given the importance of religion in history and the ongoing cultural shift, I wanted to explore it to understand more. 

At some point during my sophomore year, some of my friensd from one of my clubs invited me to checkout the Kharis Campus Ministry, a "college ministry that connects students to local churches and fosters fellowship." As members of KCM, my friends were encouraged to invite everyone to attend the general body meetings so they can spread fellowship, to both believers and non-believers alike. I was pretty curious about religion and Christianity during this time, and it was a perfect opportunity for me to broaden my horizons. 

> I want to preface my following experience with KCM by stating that I am not religious, and I have very limited knowledge of any religion. I will levy criticisms that may be short-sighted or wrong, but I just want to be honest with my experience. 

I went to my first GBM during the winter of 2022-2023, arriving a good 30 minutes late. When I arrived, I was greeted by one of my friends from class, who welcomed me warmly to the GBM. When I walked in the room, it was dark except for the dim light of the projector board with lyrics. The whole room was packed to the brim, with everyone singing along with the small band and singers with mics at the front of the room. I stood silently at the edge of the room, trying to understand and internalize the lyrics and melody, which were both very simplistic and repetitive. Every line dealt with sin, morality, Jesus, and God, and it seemed like everyone in the room knew the songs. As a "non-believer", I wasn't sure what I was supposed to do in the moment, so I just tried to fit in and follow along. After what felt like an endless torrent of Christian songs, the lights finally turned on and the GBM began.

I was surprised by how many people I knew in the room. It was full of people I've seen in VSA, TASA, high school, and more. Everyone was very nice and surprised by my attendance, happily welcoming me to KCM. The speaker at the front welcomed all the new members, giving me a goody bag as a welcome to my first ever GBM. I felt pretty comfortable now, knowing I was surrounded by a sea of people familiar faces. The board announced that the sermon today would be on sexual immorality, a relatively contentious topic and one I had relatively strong opinions of already. I was interested to see how the pastor would craft arguments against modern sexual and traditional sexual behavior and how he would use religious teachings as evidence. 

As I sat there for the next hour or so, I was pretty surprised as to not hear one logical argument against sexual immorality. I would hear sort of the same arguments over and over again, such as "avoid temptation", "you will disgrace God", and "it is God's will." At no point did the pastor explain what sexual immorality entails, why abstaining from it is God's will, or what even moral sexual behavior even means. I had some notions of the topic that I used to fil in the gaps, but I really expected to get them straight from the source. As someone who's against hookup culture and objectifying relationships, I expected to hear at least a few things I agreed with. I wanted to hear how casual sex might be objectifying, dangerous, or unfulfilling, but I got nothing. I didn't know if this was what a typical sermon is like, but I was mildly disappointed by the end.

I wasn't looking to agree nor disagree with anything, I just wanted to be enlightened on how a religious organization might tackle a divisive topic. Even more, I assumed they would attempt to persuade people they deem non-believers like me, who might not have the same presuppositions or understanding of religious arguments. As an outsider, their arguments of authority mean nothing to me. As a non-religious person, using God's will as an argument doesn't mean anything to me, as I have no notion or concept of why I should listen to him or believe him, and I barely grasp why anyone should either. There was no introduction or ease-in to the concept of God or Jesus, or why I should buy into the overall religious premise. For someone who grew up learning about the greatness of God, I can see why these arguments would be compelling. But for me, it felt more like a cult. I was expected to listen to his authority without question. 

During the sermon, I felt slightly ostracized about the comments about believers and non-believers, where non-beleivers were cast as a disagreeable and misinformed out-group. As someone who was invited to come see what Christiniaty is like, why was I being insulted during the sermon? It felt needlessly combatative if the goal is to convert me, which left me a little bit confused. For a group that welcomes everyone, I would expect a more cohesive and elaborate experience for people who aren't already Christian. If that is not the purpose of KCM, well then it's just my fault. But, regardless, I wasn't exactly satisfied from what I learned that day.

I went back to KCM a few times, but I always left with the same sort of feeling. I was unconvinced of any of the sermons because they purely relied on arguments of authority--arguments from an authority that I had no reason to believe yet. After a few of these GBMs, I didn't really want to go back because I felt as if I already experienced everything. 

Ultimately, I'm not at all saying I agree or disagree with anything. As an outsider, I guess I just expected to get more, but I could have simply been looking in the wrong place. If I find the interest to explore religion again, I can look for alternative avenues or take another look with a fresh perspective. 


