---
title: The Human Element of Politics
date: 2024-09-03
slug: human-element-of-politics

caption: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@cbarbalis?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Chris Barbalis</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/black-tree-under-rainbow-and-blue-sky-Cjz4Gvvivek?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>

image: leftright.jpg
images:
    - images/leftright.jpg
draft: true
---

# Question Everything
To some extent, you should question everything you are told. We often take a lot of information we receive from figures of authority at face value and run with it: our parents, teachers, the internet, books, or leaders of faith. However, they can be wrong. Our parents are clearly biased and see things in a certain perspective that may be right or wrong. Our teachers mix some facts up or may have their own agenda to push. The internet is full of trolls and idiots that will say anti-truths with 100% confidence. When we are young and impressionable, we might not realize that these adults don't know everything. 

Many societies have collapsed from a non-questioning belief of authority. The Nazis took Hitler's words without question. Southerners adhered to the belief that racism and slavery were virtues. Stalin's pawns wiped out hundreds of thousands of "wealthy" farmers that caused a famine that killed millions. We should question authority. It's difficult because the system is all that we've ever known. It takes courage to look for what is not right. 

In the 1400-1500s, it took courage for scientists to argue that the Earth was round. It took courage to argue that the Earth was not the center of the universe. Back then, hearing the Earth was flat was as common as hearing that the Earth is round today. Most people would not even dream of countering that assumption. Clearly, there's much more rigorous evidence today, but there was not a lack of evidence back then. Their evidence was wrong, and ours is correct...right?

## "Listen to the Experts"

## Faith in our Systems
Obviously, it's not possible or reasonable to doubt every single thing you hear. That's how we get people who use conspiracy as an explanation to everything. We've all seen when someone falls off the deep end and becomes a crazy conspiracy theorist, and that's just as bad as someone who unquestionably adheres to authority. We are fortunate enough to live in a time where a lot of things have been researched to hell. We are fortunate enough to have infinite knowledge at our fingertips. We have many great answers to difficult questions--ones that have been fleshed out and have proven their usefulness. We should have a good amount of faith in our system. Life is so unbelievably complex that it is impossible for us to be competent in more than a few fields. We have to take a lot of the things we hear from granted because it would be counterproductive to investigate every single thing we hear. We should have trust that certain experts in a field have some idea of what they're talking about. 

It's healthy to have some doubt about certain things or to look deeper when it matters. Information is diluted in such a way that you miss most of the underlying mechanisms of ideas that might sound simple at a first glance. When someone brings up counterarguments to accepted fact, don't be automatically combatative when you don't really understand the topic. We can all detect bullshit when we hear it, but we should have some humility in the face of things we do not understand. When we think someone is crazy because they think something, we're probably right most of the time. But sometimes, we should acknolwedge that some of those crazies are the crazies that told us that the Earth was round hundreds of years ago.  

It's easy to take all the information we hear today as fact. When we watch 