---
title: The Crowd is What Matters
date: 2024-07-10
slug: the-crowd-matters

caption: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@frostroomhead?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Rodion Kutsaiev</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/a-close-up-of-water-droplets-on-a-window-pVoEPpLw818?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>

image: mix.jpg
images:
    - images/mix.jpg
draft: true
---

According to Wikipedia,
> Magnet schools are public schools with specialized courses or curricula.
These schools are meant to attract ambitious students who care and excel in their programs. The idea is to give these students additional resources to explore their interests and gain a more rigorous understanding of certain materials. 

There has been a recent disturbance in the admission policies of magnet schools. Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology, historically known for its competitive admission process unbelievably high-performing student body, has moved their admission system to a lottery-based system. My magnet middle school and high school, Takoma Park Middle School and Montgomery Blair High School, were the beacons of high STEM performance in my county. Now, they've reduced their admission policies to no-test, essay- and loterry-based systems.

Previously, these programs focused on admitting both talented and ambitious students. Now, the emphasis is solely on admitting ambitious students. That's not that big of a difference, is it? If the goal is to help students explore their passion in STEM or literature or whatnot, why does talent matter? 

# Talent Matters
The smartest people I have ever met in my life are from my middle and high school, and it's not even close. I've worked three internships, attended a semi-prestigious university with 30,000+ students, participated in my fair share of clubs and events, and no one has even stepped in the realm of the people I met in my *high school.* A question begs: was Blair's program so good that it churned out all of these execellent students, or did these excellent students simply happen to attend Blair? 

I rode the bus with an International Math Olympiad Gold Medalist. A plurality of my friends are interning in the world's most prestigious market makers and trading firms. 
