---
title: Happiness
date: 2024-07-01
slug: happiness
caption: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@zacong?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Zac Ong</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/man-standing-near-white-wall-4THZE0vZVqs?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>

image: new-city.jpg
images:
    - images/new-city.jpg
---

One widely held answer for the meaning of life is the pursuit of happiness. It's a simple and understandable answer. We all want to be happy. We don't want to suffer, and some of our best moments in life are moments when we are happy. However, I don't think most of us know what "happiness" really entails. It's an emotion that trascends our simple and superficial desires. It's a state of being we strive for all of the time, 

When's the last time you were truly happy? A moment where all the stars aligned and you were the center of it all? Whether it was that one college acceptance, a heartfelt connection with a loved one, or an overwhelming personal achievement, we've experienced these flashes of happiness that where we were truly immersed in the present. However, these moments are always short-lived. Our brief moment of happiness fades in time as we reach a new level of normality, where we try to find new ways to reach that same high once again. After all, we can't dwell on one thing forever. We reach for new stimuli, new experiences, and new milestones, trying to get more out of life. Each moment of happiness is just a stepping stone toward that next moment. It's a cycle that we chase for our whole lives. 

It's impossible to always be happy. Most days, we deal with the daily struggles of life, inching forward little by little in order to the goals we set for ourself. We have to work and build in order to get what we want. We have to struggle and toil for hours, days, weeks, or years--a grueling process that nobody actually likes. However, the struggle is what makes everything worth it in the end. If you could simply get what you want immediately, there's no payoff. An xbox for free, all the luxury goods, and all the free time all at once isn't satisfying. We like to feel that we earned something--where getting what we want was due to our own volition and action.

What I've noticed when I have free time is that I have nothing to do. This is what I wanted the whole semester of school. I worked and got good grades and now I have what I wanted that whole time. But now, I'm bored. I can endlessly scroll TikToks, eat good food, and buy the things I want, but I feel useless. I no longer have a purpose, and I feel like I want to work toward something once again--but I have nothing. When I save up money to buy a thing I like, it soon fades into the background. That new laptop becomes part of my life, so regular where I no longer feel the excitement I did when I longed so much for it. The anticipation is always more powerful than once you reach it--the moment of happiness is fleeting. Now, I just want another new thing--something I can work toward. But, if I just had all the money in the world to buy whatever I wanted, would I truly be happy with the things? 

Why do billionaires chase more money? Why do they involve thmeselves in philantrhopy or work on even bigger projects? They have everything every normal person would die for, but they're not happy either. We strive for purpose, and we need difficulty and struggle. Only with the struggle can we find a brief moment of happiness at the end of the tunnel. 



toward something greater




We all have some idea of what might make us happy. We all want free time, traveling, gadgets, clothing. However,, Those are just surface manifestations 