---
title: Holier than Thou
date: 2025-01-21
slug: holier-than-thou

image: moon.jpg
images:
    - images/moon.jpg
draft: true
---

With my self-declared degree in epidemiology, I diagnose the world with something I now call "Holier than Thou Syndrome" (HTS). This now prevalent disease remained relatively dormant and contained until the world achieved its first taste of economic, technological, and political prosperity. All of a sudden, HTS ravaged the planet in an outbreak never seen before. We have reached pandemic-level proportions of HTS, and I recommend the governments of the world (particularly in the West) to declare a state of emergency. 

Symptoms often include tweeting intellectually dishonest tirades, posting a black square on your instagram story, airing out family drama for personal gain, or thinking that people who disagree with you are evil. There's no conclusive diagnosis, but it often boils down to "you know it when you see it." Unfortunately, there currently is no societal cure. Some people have natural immunity, while others are more susceptible to HTS. Some remedies we have found useful include having open discussions with different kinds of people, picking up a history or pyschology book, showing appreciation, or simple retrospection. HTS can go a lifetime undetected or untreated. As a leading expert in the field, I will guide you through common symptoms to help you identify and treat HTS in yourself or others. 

# Symptoms
## 1. Intellectually Dishonesty (ID)
We observed that HTS tends to interfere with neural pathways related to critical thought. As a result, patients with HTS often engage in arguments in an intellectually dishonest manner. Their tactics may include:

- mischaracterizing their opponent's argument for personal gain
- introducing straw man arguments
- resorting to ad hominems
- arguing in bad faith

We noticed an overrepresentation of HTS-afflicted individuals on media platforms. Instead of ID appearing in conversation, it would appear in the form of one-way communication, such as social media posts, newspaper articles, or advertisements. 

### Examples
Person A is normal. Person B has recently been diagnosed with HTS.

**Person A**: I like pancakes

**Person B**: So you hate waffles?
<hr>

**Person A**: I think soda has too much sugar.

**Person B**: So you want to force everyone to drink kale water instead? What if they can't afford it?
<hr>

**Person A**: I didn't like Professor Umbridges class. 

**Person B**: Wow, you really just can't stand getting taught by a powerful woman. 
<hr>

> Intellectual dishonesty can be normal in small doses. Habitual intellectual dishonesty or a refusal to acknowledge intellectual dishonesty may be an indicator of HTS. However, this mode of behavior is also common among people who don't challenge their own beliefs. The symptom is not conclusive in a proper diagnosis. 

